<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="CONTENT-TYPE" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
<title>XBLUI - Introduction</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="documentation.css" />
<link rel="viewer" href="viewer.xhtml" />
</head>
<body>
<h1>Introduction</h1>
<h2>Overview</h2>
<p>XBLUI provides user interface enhancements for HTML.
Enhancements
are implemented as element bindings using the W3C's <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/xbl">XML
Binding Language</a> (XBL)<sup>1,2</sup>. XBL
provides a simple
method of applying and extending the built-in
enhancements. </p>
<p>Since no current browser has a native XBL implementation XBLUI
has
its own partial, cross-browser implementation. Native XBL
implementations will improve the performance of XBLUI
enhancements. </p>
<p>XBLUI is a cross-browser Javascript library and incorporates
Javascript and DOM fixes and enhancements to promote standards-based,
browser-agnostic web-development. </p>
<p>To facilitate development XBLUI incorporates cross-browser
logging
and will soon have other tracing features.</p>
<small><strong>Notes:</strong>
<ol>
<li>Also
commonly referred to as XBL2, and not to be confused with Mozilla XBL
also known as XBL1.
</li>
<li>Enhancements to elements are
called bindings in XBL.
</li>
</ol>
</small>
<h2>Quick start</h2>
<p>Using XBLUI in your web-page is usually a three step process:</p>
<ol>
<li>include the XBLUI.js file with a &lt;script&gt;
element</li>
<li>create a XBL binding document to specify which elements
receive user interface enhancements</li>
<li>include the XBL binding document with a
&lt;link&gt; or &lt;style&gt; element (similar to
including a CSS document)
</li>
</ol>
<p>The following example illustrates the simple case of adding
numeric input functionality to a HTML input element as in the Web
Forms 2 specification:</p>
<pre>&lt;html&gt;<br /> &lt;head&gt;<br /> &lt;script src="http://dist.meekostuff.net/XBLUI/default/XBLUI.js"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;<sup>1,2</sup><br /> &lt;style type="application/xml"&gt;<sup>3,4</sup><br /> &lt;xbl xmlns="http://www.w3.org/ns/xbl"&gt;<br /> &lt;binding <br /> element="input[type=number]"<br /> extends="http://dist.meekostuff.net/XBLUI/default/WF2.xml#WF2NumberInput"/&gt;<br /> &lt;/xbl&gt;<br /> &lt;/style&gt;<br /> &lt;/head&gt;<br /> &lt;body&gt;<br /> &lt;label&gt;Enter a number from 0 to 100 &lt;input type="number" min="0" max="100" value="50" /&gt;&lt;/label&gt;<br /> &lt;/body&gt;<br />&lt;/html&gt;</pre>
<small><strong>Notes:</strong>
<ol>
<li>This
is the default script path. You can also choose a specific version. See
Distribution
</li>
<li>In
general the script element should be at the top of the head
element.
</li>
<li>The
type attribute of the style element must be "application/xml". See
Including Binding Documents </li>
<li>The XBL specification also
allows bindings to be applied using CSS style-sheets. This is not yet
available using XBLUI. </li>
</ol>
</small>
<h2>Assumed knowledge</h2>
<p>To read this guide and get started with XBLUI you should have
a
basic understanding of HTML, XML and CSS. </p>
<p>For advanced usage you will need to know Javascript and the
DOM. </p>
<p>Examples in this guide are for illustration only, and are not
appropriate for the open web without validation. In particular, HTML
examples do not include a DOCTYPE statement, and while they use some
XHTML-compatible features - lower-case tags and " /&gt;"
tag-endings - they are not intended to be served as XHTML. </p>
<h2>Warnings</h2>
<h3>Work in progress</h3>
<ul>
<li>Hasn't been rigorously
tested </li>
<li>Partial implementations
of standards - don't assume that because it's in the standard it will
work </li>
<li>Might not play nice - XBLUI hasn't been used with other
Javascript libraries and may not work well or at all</li>
</ul>
<p class="todo">TODO: What sort of libraries might
complement XBLUI? Canvas? I/O? Math
&amp; String processing?</p>
<h3>Doesn't cure CSS pain</h3>
<ul>
<li>CSS bugs aren't fixed </li>
<li>No built-in themes </li>
<li>Some XBLUI enhancements are designed to interact with your
CSS </li>
</ul>
<h3>Partial implementation of XBL</h3>
<p>Besides the inherent limitations of current browsers, the
major
deficiencies of the XBL implementation are, in order of importance: </p>
<ul>
<li>XBL Templates and
shadow content aren't implemented. </li>
<li>Dynamic modification of
HTML isn't handled, i.e. XBL bindings aren't applied to dynamically
inserted elements and bindings aren't updated if attributes (including
pseudo-attributes) change </li>
<li>xbl
processing-instructions are only registered for XHTML documents, not
for HTML documents
</li>
<li>loadBindingDocument()
is not implemented </li>
<li>XBL documents can't be
modified </li>
<li>Default action handlers aren't registered</li>
</ul>
<p>XBLUI logs warning messages for XBL elements and attributes
that
it doesn't implement.</p>
<p>There are also some non-standard extensions provided by XBLUI:</p>
<ul>
<li>XBL binding documents
may be included with &lt;link&gt; or &lt;style&gt;
elements, similar to including CSS.  </li>
<li>cross-browser (but non-standard) logging
</li>
</ul>
<p>The alternate method for including XBL is essential, so some
change to your web-page will be required when native XBL
implementations become available (unless the extension is
incorporated into the standard). </p>
<h2>Principles of use</h2>
<h3>Progressive Enhancement</h3>
<p>In general you should follow the philosophy of <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progressive_Enhancement">progressive
enhancement</a> when you create your pages. </p>
<ol>
<li>Start with basic HTML
markup and create pages that are semantically succinct and accessible
even when no scripting (or even styling) is available.  </li>
<li>Use CSS to enhance
layout.  </li>
<li>Use XBLUI to enhance behavior.  </li>
</ol><h2>See also</h2>
<ul>
<li><a href="showcase/index.html">Demos</a> </li>
<li>
<a href="status.html">Current
status</a> </li>
<li>
Issues </li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>XBL implementations
<ul>
<li><a href="http://dev.w3.org/cvsweb/2006/waf/XBLImpl/">The
W3C
reference implementation</a> by <a href="http://www.tml.tkk.fi/%7Empohja/">Mikko Pohja</a>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<a href="http://code.google.com/p/xbl/">An
MIT licenced implementation</a> by <a href="http://www.ilinsky.com/">Sergey Ilinsky</a> </li>
</ul>
<h2>References </h2>
<dl>
<dt><a name="refsXBL2">[XBL2] </a></dt>
<dd><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/CR-xbl-20070316/">XML
Binding Language (XBL) 2.0</a>, I. Hickson. W3C,
Candidate Recommendation 16 March 2007. The latest version of the XBL
specification is available at <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/xbl/">http://www.w3.org/TR/xbl/</a>
</dd>
<dt> <a name="refsXBLPrimer">[XBLPrimer]
</a></dt>
<dd><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/WD-xbl-primer-20070718/">XBL
2.0 Primer: An Introduction for Developers</a>, L.
Hunt, M. Caceras. W3C, Working Draft 18 July 2007. The latest version
of the XBL Primer is available at <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/xbl-primer">http://www.w3.org/TR/xbl-primer/</a>
</dd>
</dl>
</body></html>