<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="CONTENT-TYPE" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
<title>XBLUI - About</title>
<link rel="viewer" href="viewer.xhtml" />
</head>
<body lang="en-AU">
<h2>Overview</h2>
<p>XBLUI provides user interface enhancements for HTML. 
Enhancements are implemented with element bindings using the W3C's <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/xbl">XML Binding Language</a> (XBL)<sup>1</sup>. 
XBL provides a simple method of applying and extending the built-in enhancements.</p>
<p>XBLUI is a cross-browser Javascript library and incorporates Javascript and DOM fixes and enhancements to promote standards-based, browser-agnostic web-development. </p>
<p>Since no current browser has a native XBL implementation
XBLUI has its own partial, cross-browser implementation.
Native XBL implementations will improve the performance of XBLUI enhancements. </p>
<small><strong>Notes:</strong>
<ol>
<li>Also commonly referred to as XBL2, not to be confused with the non-compatible
<a href="http://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/XBL">Mozilla XBL</a> also known as XBL1.
</li>
</ol>
</small>
<h2>Quick start</h2>
<p>Using XBLUI in your web-page is typically a three step process:</p>
<ol>
<li>include the XBLUI script</li>
<li>create a XBL document to specify which elements receive user interface enhancements</li>
<li>include the XBL document with a <code>link</code> or <code>style</code> element (similar to including a CSS document)
</li>
</ol>
<p>The following example illustrates the simple case of adding
numeric input functionality to a HTML input element as in the Web
Forms 2 specification:</p>
<pre>
&lt;html&gt;<br />
 &lt;head&gt;<br />
  &lt;script src="http://dist.meekostuff.net/XBLUI/1.1-default/XBLUI.js"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;<br />
  &lt;style type="application/xml"&gt;<br />
   &lt;xbl xmlns="http://www.w3.org/ns/xbl"&gt;<br />
    &lt;binding <br />
     element="input[type=number]"<br />
	 extends="http://dist.meekostuff.net/XBLUI/default/WF2.xml#WF2NumberInput"/&gt;<br />
   &lt;/xbl&gt;<br />
  &lt;/style&gt;<br />
 &lt;/head&gt;<br />
 &lt;body&gt;<br />
  &lt;label&gt;Enter a number from 0 to 100 <br />
   &lt;input type="number" min="0" max="100" value="50" /&gt;<br />
  &lt;/label&gt;<br />
 &lt;/body&gt;<br />
&lt;/html&gt;
</pre>
<h2>License</h2>
<h2>Licensing</h2>
<p>XBLUI is available under the
<a href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/legalcode">Creative-Commons Attribution, No-Derivatives license</a>.
If you aren't sure whether that applies to your intended usage then contact me for specific approval.
The following list are guides for some specific scenarios:</p>
<ul>
<li>you can use the library in any web-page by including a script element linking to the original file on the meekostuff.net domain</li>
<li>you can also copy the library to the domain of the web-page and link to it there</li>
<li>you can copy the library to another domain for the purpose of redistribution provided you acknowledge that it is the XBLUI library
and that you provide a link to the <a href="http://meekostuff.net/projects/XBLUI">XBLUI project page</a>
at <a href="http://meekostuff.net">meekostuff.net</a>.</li>
</ul>
<p>Long-term licensing is yet to be decided - please check the license conditions of new releases before use. </p>
</body>
</html>
